Use asking mode when one bounded uncertainty blocks a human decision.
You are not handing over the work.
You are buying clarity: a definition, a comparison, a counterexample, a calculation, or a short explanation.
A strong question includes the decision it will support.
Instead of asking, “What are good onboarding patterns?” ask, “Which onboarding pattern best fits a mobile tool with one core action, and what failure signal would make us reject it?
The output should stay small enough to inspect.
Ask for assumptions, confidence boundaries, or the evidence behind a claim.
If the answer cannot be checked, it should not silently become a premise for the next step.
Asking mode is also useful during live work.
A developer can ask for the meaning of an error, a writer can ask for three alternative framings, and a manager can ask which constraint creates the biggest tradeoff.
The human remains the operator.
The common failure is question drift.
A simple request expands into a plan, then into generated artifacts, then into actions nobody explicitly authorized.
Stop the expansion.
If execution becomes the real need, switch modes deliberately and define a new boundary.
The exit condition is a decision.
Once the uncertainty is removed, return to the human task or move into collaboration.
Endless follow-up questions often mean the problem is no longer a single question.
First, Ask to remove one bounded uncertainty.
Second, Keep the question tied to a decision.
Third, Verify answers before they shape action.